The hierarchical approach has three important strengths. First, it emphasises the link betweenstrategy and performance. Virtually all strategic management researchers, and most practisingmanagers, are interested in the relationship between the actions taken by a firm anda firm’s performance. The hierarchical definition provides explicit criteria for judging theperformance quality of a firm’s strategies – good strategies enable an organisation to reachits objectives and fulfil its mission; bad strategies make it more difficult for a firm to reach itsobjectives and fulfil its mission.Second, this hierarchical definition focuses on the multiple levels of analysis that areimportant in formulating and implementing strategies. These levels of analysis vary in theirdegree of abstraction. Company missions are very abstract concepts. They specify what a firmwants to become but say little about how a firm will get to where it wants to go. Objectivestranslate missions into specific goals and targets and thus are less abstract. Strategies specifywhich actions firms will take to meet their objectives. Plans (the least abstract concept) focuson specific actions that need to be taken to implement strategies.By emphasising the multiple levels of analysis in the strategic management process, hierarchicaldefinitions appropriately emphasise the need in organisations to gather information,ideas and suggestions from all parts of the firm in order to formulate effective strategies.In this conception of strategy, each part of a firm plays an important role. Senior managersspecialise in establishing missions and objectives, divisional managers specialise in strategyformulation and functional managers focus their efforts on tactics. No one of these tasksis more important than any other. Missions and objectives will never be achieved withoutstrategies and tactics. Strategies without missions and objectives will be unfocused. Strategieswithout tactics are usually not implemented. And plans without strategies or missions are notlikely to improve a firm’s performance.A third strength of the hierarchical definition is that it emphasises the fact that strategy,in order to have an impact on performance, cannot remain simply an idea in an organisation.Rather, it must be translated, through resource allocation, into action. An organisation’smission is often a statement of an idea, or a manifestation of the values, of top management.However, by itself a mission statement is likely to have little impact on a firm’s performance.Rather, this mission statement must be linked with objectives, strategies and tactics. Inchoosing objectives, strategies and tactics, managers must make tough decisions, set prioritiesEffectivenessDoing the rightthing – making thecorrect strategic choice.Marketing auditAn analysis andevaluation of the internaland external marketing environment of the company.The process by which managers ensure that planned activities are completely and properly executed.and allocate resources. Firms that translate their mission into actions increase the probabilitythat they will improve their performance (McGuire et al., 2012).Weaknesses of the hierarchical approach to marketing planningThe most important weaknesses of the hierarchical approach are as follows. First, it has avery underdeveloped notion of the external competitive environment’s impact on strategyformulation and implementation. Mission statements summarise where the senior managementwant an organisation to be in the long run, but the development of these statements isencouraged to focus inward. In choosing a mission, senior managers are encouraged to lookinward, evaluating their own personal priorities and values. Certainly, this kind of analysis isan important step in developing a firm’s mission.Indeed, part of this book is devoted to this kind of internal analysis. Such an analysis,however, must be linked with the external analysis (Part II) in order for firms to choosemissions, objectives, strategies and thus marketing plans that will add value to the firm.A second weakness of the hierarchical definition is that it tends to focus, almost exclusively,on formal, routine, bureaucratic strategy-making processes. In this definition, strategicchoices are made through systematic study and analysis. These analyses result incoherent, self-reinforcing sets of strategies that, taken together, lead a firm to reach its objectivesand mission. There is little doubt that many organisations choose at least some of theirstrategies in this logical and systematic way. An enormous amount of research on formalstrategic planning suggests that more and more firms are adopting explicit and formal planningsystems to choose their strategies. The hierarchical definitions presented in Figure 1.1tend to emphasise this formal, systematic aspect of choosing and implementing strategies.Yet not all strategies are chosen in this way. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)choose strategies by discovering an unanticipated opportunity and exploiting that opportunityto improve performance, resulting in ‘emerging strategies’ (Mintzberg, 1987; Mintzberg andWaters, 1985). Firms also choose strategies ‘retroactively’ – that is, they engage in certain kindsof behaviour over time, and then, only after that pattern of behaviour is in existence, seniormanagers label these actions as a coherent or consistent strategy. Some firms stumble intotheir strategy by chance. All these are ways that firms can choose strategies, yet none of themis consistent with the formal, systematic strategic management process presented. A third weakness of hierarchical approaches to defining strategy and strategic managementis that, despite their apparent rigour and clarity, they often fail to give significant guidanceto managers when they are applied in real organisations. There are literally thousands ofobjectives that an organisation could choose to support any given mission statement. Whichobjectives a firm should choose, which should be given priority and which should be ignoredare questions that must be answered logically and with ideas that are not provided in thehierarchical definition. Moreover, there may be thousands of different strategies that firmscould choose to support any given set of objectives. Which particular strategies a firm shouldchoose goes beyond the hierarchical model.The traditional (transactional) marketing (tm) concept versusthe relationship marketing (rm) conceptThe American Marketing Association (AMA), an international organisation of practitionersand academicians, defines marketing as follows:SMEs Small and medium-sized enterprises. In the EU, SMEs are characterised as having 250 employees or less; they comprise approximately 99 per cent of all firms.Marketing is the process of planning and executing the conception, pricing, promotion, anddistribution of ideas, goods, and services to create exchanges that satisfy individual and organizational objectives.This definition describes what the traditional (transactional) marketing concept is: theconception, pricing, promotion and distribution of ideas, goods and services. Moreover, thedefinition implies a list of activities for the marketer to undertake: the planning and execution ofthese four elements of competition so that individual and organisational objectives are satisfied.Another characteristic of transactional marketing is the belief that independence of choiceamong marketing players provides a more efficient system for creating and distributingmarketing value. Maintaining an arm’s length relationship is considered vital for marketingefficiency. Industrial organisations and government policy makers believe that independenceof marketing players provides each player freedom to choose his/her transactional partnerson the basis of preserving their own self-interests at each decision point. This results in theefficiency of lowest-cost purchases through bargaining and bidding.The so-called 4Ps are the epitome of what should be done and are also known as the‘marketing mix’. This transactional, micro-economic and teacher-friendly marketing frameworkis straightforward to understand and use. Indeed, in the 1950s and 1960s the 4Psapproach proved very successful. In the USA this was the era of mass manufacturing andmass marketing of packaged consumer goods and, because of that, marketing was often moreabout attracting than retaining customers.The model of transaction marketing (as in the 4Ps) rests on three assumptions:There is a large number of potential customers;The customers and their needs are fairly homogeneous;It is rather easy to replace lost customers with new customers.Looking at today’s markets, and certainly when moving from consumer markets to industrialand service markets, this approach may not be appropriate.
The general message of RM regarding distribution is that it should get closer to the customer.Conventional marketing thinking sees distribution as the channel that takes the product fromproducer to consumer. In the case of the computer industry, Dell sees distribution as a directsales approach, primarily using the Internet, telephone sales and order placement, whereasIBM uses many approaches to distribution, including its own stores, a direct sales force andretailers that resell the firm’s personal computers. RM instead considers distribution from theperspective of the customer – who decides where, how and when to buy the combination ofproducts and services that constitute the vendor’s total offering. Seen this way, distribution isnot a channel but a process. The process allows customers to choose where and from whomthey will obtain the value they want. Continuing the computer example just mentioned, thecustomer can choose whether to buy an off-the-shelf model from a reseller and take it homeimmediately, order one to be built to individual preferences at the factory and shipped withina week or so, or have one configured in-store that will be available within a few days. It thusmay be more accurate to think of distribution as placement, giving customers choices withregard to the locations at which they will specify, purchase, receive, install, repair and returnindividual components of the products and services. That is, whereas traditional marketingconsiders a product as a bundled package of benefits, RM unbundles the product and serviceand allows the customer to initiate a placement decision for each element.
Tata Nano started with the vision of Ratan Tata, thechairman of Tata Motors’ parent, the Tata Group, to createan ultra-low-cost car for a new category of Indian consumer:someone who couldn’t afford the US$5,000 sticker price ofwhat was then the cheapest car on the market and insteaddrove his family around on a US$1,000 motorcycle. Manydrivers in India can only afford motorcycles and it is fairlycommon to see an Indian family of four using a motorcycleto get around.In India alone there are 50–100 million people caught inthat automotive chasm. Until now none of the Indian carmakers has focused on this segment, and in this respect theNano is a great example of the blue ocean strategy.The customer was ever-present in the development ofthe Nano. Tata didn’t set the price by calculating the cost ofproduction and then adding a margin; rather it set US$2,500as the price that it thought customers could pay and thenworked back, with the help of partners willing to take ona challenge, to build a US$2,500 car that would reward allinvolved with a small profit.The Nano engineers and partners didn’t simply stripfeatures out of an existing car – the tack Renault took withits Dacia Logan, which sells in India for roughly US$10,000.Instead, they looked at their target customers’ lives forcost-cutting ideas. So, for instance, the Nano has a smallerengine than other cars because more horsepower wouldbe wasted in India’s jam-packed cities, where the averagespeed is 10–20 miles per hour.The Nano aims to bring the joys of motoring to millionsof Indians, doing for the subcontinent what the VolkswagenBeetle did for Germany and the Mini for Britain.
When the international economy was relatively static, competition was a ‘war of position’in which firms occupied competitive space like squares on a chessboard. The key tocompetitive advantage was where a firm chose to compete. How it chose to compete wasalso important but secondary – a matter of execution. However, as markets fragment andproduct life cycles accelerate, dominating existing product segments becomes less important.In today’s dynamic business environment a firm’s success depends on anticipation ofmarket trends and quick response to changing customer needs. The essence of strategy isnot the structure of a firm’s products but the dynamics of its behaviour. In future the goalis to identify and develop the hard-to-imitate organisational capabilities that distinguish afirm from its competitors in the eyes of customers.
A core competence, as articulated by Prahalad and Hamel (1990), has three traits: it makes acontribution to perceived customer benefits; it is difficult for competitors to imitate; and it canbe leveraged to a wide variety of markets. Knowing a firm’s core competence is important fordeveloping strategy. By concentrating on the core competence and outsourcing other activities,managers can use their company’s resources in four ways: they maximise returns by focusing onwhat they do best; they provide formidable barriers against the entry of competitors; they fullyutilise external suppliers’ strengths and investment that they would not be able to duplicate; andthey reduce investment and risk, shorten cycle times and increase customer responsiveness.Figure 2.3 shows the connection between resources, core competences, sustainable competitiveadvantages and competitive excellence.Resources alone are not a basis for competitive advantage. It is the way in which resourcesare integrated with each other to perform a task or an activity that provides the capabilityfor an organisation to compete successfully in the marketplace. This being the case, the mostimportant resource for any organisation is the skill and knowledge possessed by the organisation’semployees. It is this skill and knowledge, acquired over time and embedded in the firm’sculture, that influences how it operates and determines its success.Whether or not resources and capabilities have the potential to become core competencesdepends on how difficult they are for competitors to acquire and how valuable they are to the firmas a basis for competitive advantage. When they are rare, difficult to imitate, non-substitutableand they allow a firm to exploit opportunities or neutralise threats, then they can be consideredcore competences and serve as the basis of an organisation’s sustained competitive advantage.A resource becomes a source of sustainable competitive advantage only if it passes severaltests. First, it must be competitively superior and valuable in the product market. Second, itmust be difficult to imitate. Third, it must not be easy to replace by an alternative capability.Fourth, it must be durable. Fifth, it must be difficult to move. If the capability can move withan employee then it is the employee, not the corporation, that will acquire the value.Some individual capabilities may pass the tests. A world-class brand, for example, willcontinue to confer advantage on its owner. But few individual capabilities are unassailable,and even a first-to-market advantage can fade away without proper support. The key tosustaining competitive advantage as a business grows is to assemble a bundle of distinctivecapabilities that together satisfy the criteria.
Porter’s work (1985) is the key reference on value chains and value configuration analysis forcompetitive advantage.Value chains are created by transforming a set of inputs into more refined outputs. The strategicchallenges associated with managing a value chain are related to manufacturing productswith the right quality at the lowest possible cost. The ways to reduce costs – or increasevalue – are primarily found through economies of scale, efficient capacity utilisation, learningeffects, product and information flows and quality measures. Critical drivers of value creationin chains also include the interrelationships between primary activities, on the one hand, andproduct development, marketing and service, i.e. support activities, on the other hand.The firm’s value chain, as shown in Figure 2.6 for example, provides a systematic means ofdisplaying and categorising activities. The activities performed by a firm in any industry canbe grouped into nine generic categories.At each stage of the value chain there exists an opportunity to contribute positively tothe firm’s competitive strategy by performing some activity or process in a way that is betterthan the competitors, and so providing some uniqueness or advantage. If a firm attains sucha competitive advantage that is sustainable, defensible, profitable and valued by the market,then it may earn high rates of return, even though the industry may be unfavourable and theaverage profitability of the industry modest.In competitive terms, value is the amount that buyers are willing to pay for what a firmprovides them (perceived value) less the sacrifices that the customers offer to obtain access tothe value (e.g. money, time). A firm is profitable if the value it commands exceeds the costsinvolved in creating the product. According to the ‘formula’ in Figure 2.10, it is implied thatcustomer-perceived value should be higher than 1. Creating value for buyers that exceedsthe cost of doing so is the goal of any generic strategy. Value, instead of cost, must be usedin analysing competitive position, since firms often deliberately raise their costs in order tocommand a premium price via differentiation. The concept of buyers’ perceived value will bediscussed further in this chapter.
One of the key features of most industries is that a single organisation rarely undertakes all valueactivities from product design to distribution to the final consumer. There is usually a specialisationof roles, and any single organisation usually participates in the wider value system, whichcreates a product or service. In understanding how value is created, it is not enough to look atthe firm’s internal value chain alone. Much of the value creation will occur in the supply anddistribution chains, and this whole process needs to be analysed and understood.Suppliers have value chains (upstream value) that create and deliver the purchased inputsused in a firm’s chain. Suppliers not only deliver a product, but also can influence a firm’sperformance in many other ways. For example, Benetton, the Italian fashion company,managed to sustain an elaborate network of suppliers, agents and independent retail outletsas the basis of its rapid and successful international development during the 1970s and 1980s.In addition, products pass through the value chain channels (channel value) on their way tothe buyer. Channels perform additional activities that affect the buyer and influence the firm’sown activities. A firm’s product eventually becomes part of its buyer’s value chain. The ultimatebasis for differentiation is a firm and its product’s role in the buyer’s value chain, which determinesthe buyer’s needs. Gaining and sustaining competitive advantage depends on understandingnot only a firm’s value chain, but how the firm fits into the overall value system.There are often circumstances where the overall cost can be reduced (or value increased)by collaborative arrangements between different organisations in the value system. It will beseen in Chapter 9 that this is often the rationale behind joint ventures (e.g. sharing technologyin the international motor manufacture and electronics industries).